Christian could be called a Corporate Traveler. As a Lead Editor from a major firm, she is doing trip every once in a month and even every weeks for internal trips in australia. With covid, she switch form waiting in airport lounges to getto,g video calls into people's lounge rooms. 

"Technology works with all clients" she said. Buisness travels are endengared with the pandemic : Boston consulting predict more damage on buisness trips than domestic ones. According to a survey, 9 executives out of 10 plan to travel less after covid.
The length of the pandemic taught us how to work withouth travels.
[Sadly], buisness travels are a big part of airplane's company revenu: 40% passengers, 60% revenues for a total of 7.5bn dollars for national planes ; 10% passengers yet a whopping 10.5bn in revenue and an aditionnal 3.5bn invested in agents for buisness classes.

But while domestic border close is a shot term issue, a bigger, long term one is awaiting : corporate climate pledges. More and more buisnesses take care of their environement impact and lead to do less plane trips and avoid mooving for a single meeting. Christian states that with theses changes, quick trips are gonna cease. 

Some hopes is shared in the corporate events sector : the central conference center still manage to plan over 700 events for a total of 1.4M visitors. Geff D., manager of the conference center, says that such activity in a capital city drive the spending (of what?) on economicall benefit. According to Tom V., the energy of a conference can't be reproduced virtually. He anticipate that the recovery of domestic air travel could take from 2 to 3 years, and way worse for buisness ones. Also, travel between europe & US will re-open quickly, wheras Australia will have more issues reoppening with the world.
