---
order: 1
draft:
title: The Keynesian revolution
---

# The Keynesian revolution

## A complete break with the neoclassical

### A moral revolution

*He was aware that he was written in a hard political and economic time (rising of the H and the Great Depression).* He hopped to gives back the economy to politics to help them govern.

Keynes thinks that in around a hundred years, the economic problem will be solved. Humans will not have to works from them, thanks to the technical progress. And so, humans could use their free time to other things, such as philosophy and art. In the future, the challenge is to use our free time wisely (in a good way). Loosing the tradition of working will be difficult (as they are too dump). He thinks people are sick of the money.

To achieve theses goals, we need to achieve theses four goals first:
1. Control Demography evolution
2. Brings Peace on the world
3. Have Faith in Science
4. Growth <u>under conditions</u>

Then, economists would be like dentists: they will take a look at the problems of the economy and *health* them.

The models built by the neoclassical are not good enough for the crisis: so we need to build a new one. We need to create a model that can **understand** the big institutions of capitalism, within 2 in particular: **money** and **wage labor**. déflation + chômage. 

### A Monetary Production Economy (**MPE**)

The vision of the economy, as what is around us, will also be revolutionized. *He almost called his book "monetary theory of production" as how it was important*. Studying only the production is the limit of the neoclassic theory, and even more when crisis. As you have deflation and unemployment, we need to study the money & labor market. **The money NEED to be studied.** 

First and for all, the money **have a central role**. The money isn't neutral. Money is the prefer means of agents to detain wealth. Because people want te be wealthy, they desire money. So they want money to be richer, not to buy things.

Franck Van de Velde is a Kenesian economist, which works around the wage labor. Emploies are paid in **money**, *not in something else*. This mean there is a gap between production and appropriation of production's wealth. He will think of a fourth criteria, money is used to pay workers (as follow):

1. Accounting unit
2. Medium of exchange
3. Store of value
4. **Remuneration of worker**

When you invest money, you kind of know what append to it. But when you pay an employee, you never know if these money will be stored or spent.

This way, there is *maybe* a disequilibrium between supply & demand. $S \neq D$. It's only one hypothesis (Say's Law), but yet the most important one and the only one which make everyone "agree".

This way, producers can be considered as *entrepreneurs*, which **anticipates the future to make preset decisions**. This anticipation was never took into account by neoclassical.

In the end, with not neutral money, people may *or may not* want money for itself. And production is an anticipation of the future, and sometime they can fail. This is why Keynes use the term **General uncertainty**.

In Chapter 12, TG, he think about of the radical uncertainty, in the metaphora of the beauty contest. People do as everyone, so let's follow it. But if it collapsed, you'r all dead baby. We are loosing the rational human idea to a "animal spirits" one (as humans have limited mindpower, they acknowledge they will do mistakes and prefer follow others.). 

|                    **Neoclassical market**                     |                                         **Keynesian market**                                          |
| :------------------------------------------------------------: | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|                      Perfect anticipation                      |                                          General uncertainty                                          |
|                        Homo œconomicus                         |                                                Mimicry                                                |
|                  Calculus to make a decision                   |                                  Deliberation (including collective)                                  |
| Market as the aggregation of individual rational<br>behaviours |                                    Market as ruled by conventions                                     |
|               Objective price set by the market                |                                  Value set by the opinion of agents                                   |
|                         Neutral money                          |                                    Monetary economy (active money)                                    |
|                          Equilibrium                           |                                            Disequilibrium                                             |
|                        Self-regulation                         | Importance of the State intervention when the market’s<br>conventions fail to lead to a good solution |

## The truth birth of modern macroeconomics

### The Keynesian multiplier

Neoclassicals are originally a micro-ish analyse. And as the comunity is an aggregation of individuals, macro is just the aggregations of micro. They think like a **brige** (and Keynes of **no-bridge**).
Macroeconomy is not pure abstraction (Java do). We use stylized facts (unemployment, xxx) to analyse the economy globally. This is why we can say this is the truth birth of macro-economics.

The Keynesian Multiplier is inspired by Richard Kahn. It resolves around a $k$ that refers to the rate at which income is multiplied when aggregated investment increases. (*bref le Y ?*). At which point production is sensible to investment? It's kind of an elasticity, for production against another variable, such as state intervention.

The most Keynesian multiplier is the fiscal multiplier (*multiplicateur budgétaire*) which mesure the rise of a government expanse on the production ($G \longrightarrow \gamma$). If K < 1, production is meanly impacted (and so public investment isn't *rentable*). If k >= 1, it's perfect, as it gives more production. anti-Keynesian or Keynesian .

But *how could we mesure the value of this multiplier?* This is still subject to debates around economists. Thus, you should do public investment or not. Before 2007, countries and institutions considers that the mulitplicator is anti-Keynesian. In 2019, Alberto Alessina examine 200 austerity plans (policies to reduce the public expanses) since the 70s. *It's an empirical study.* The book conclude that almost every austerity plan doing a tax increase had not the effect expected. This book provoked a big debate, as it did not think about the link between growth & austerity (maybe austerity influence growth, or maybe a growth decrease lead to a "needed" austerity plan)

If the State's debts ($B_t = G - T$) is > 90% of the GDP. Unlike us, State will not dye. So state can pay the debts... From another debts. So, we have $B_{t + 1} - B_t$. But, if more than 90% of the PIB is debts, we loose trust in such state to *rembourse* debts. $i$ will increase, so $B_t$ increase, which reinforce the increase of $i$.

The IMF made a study in 2013 on (anti-)Keynesian multipliers. They acknowledged that Keynesian multipliers where highly under estimated. They concluded that theses multipliers where between 0.9 and 1.7, with a median on 1.3. They also concluded that bad economical climate would help multipliers to be higher.

### The liquidity preference

Keynes take into account political and social factors, not included in the Neoclassical analysys. Economy is not only big laws, it have to be linked to reality. Keynes consider that possessing liquidity is for 3 reasons:

1. **Motif de Transactions** pour faire des échanges de monnaies.
2. **Motif de  Précautions** et l'épargne de précautions.
3. **Motif de spéculation** pour réaliser des opérations spéculatives potentiellement risquées 

This way, interest rate is the *compensation* for **giving up liquidity**.

Keynes is for the State intervention as the market will lead to under-employment (*opposite of Voluntary Unemployment of the neoclassical*). 

“The possession of liquid money soothes our anxiety, and this anxiety is measured
by the premium we demand to part with this liquidity” (Keynes, 1936).

**-> This way, the Money Market is completely rethought**

###  Keynesian anticipations

Almost every model, even the most liberal ones, use the notion of **anticipation**. It's an assumption on individual behaviors and it have a **BIG** relation between other macroeconomic variables, including production, investment and interest rate.

For him, *no one* is a *real* professional agent, more of a magic wizard. This mechanism exacerbates in "*abnormal times*", time frames with higher uncertainty and a bad business climate. The most "*professionals*" one try to anticipate fluctuations on the market to make money, but it's something kind of impossible. Instead, they guess what the mass will do. 

Example: if a lot of people want a specific action, it will increase. If not, it will decrease. So, if individuals thinks that Total Energies will make more profit, they will buy actions and so *de facto* increase the price of the actions.This way, actions are not linked to the real performances of the corporation. 

Theses anticipations are also called **Extrapolative Anticipations**.
