---
order: 3
draft: false
title: 🤯 A new analysis of economic crises
---

# 🤯 A new analysis of economic crises

## A new vision of global demand

### The effective demand

According to Keynes, the main driver of the economy is Investment. We already says that investment is mainly driven by anticipated demand, he will only inest if if thinks if his production is sold.

According to Keynes, the main driver of employment  is the factor cost, which can be or capital (user costs) or labor (wages). The *entrepreneur* will only employed if he thinks the proceeds of that employment will be effected to be worth it. 

The effective demand is a synonym of the anticipated demand, it's the one that should be realized if the *entrepreneur* wasn't wrong with his expectations. **It's the one that determine the level of production**, *not the observed one*.

Bad or unstable effective demand lead to unemployment.

Effective demand is finally lead by c, the **marginal propensity to consume**. 

Z = C + I, and as Investment is unstable, so effective demand become unstable too
*Z stands for Effective Demand.*

### The automatic stabilizers

Automatic stabilizers are a way to smooth the fluctuations (chocks) of an economy. Theses works with **proportional fiscality** : having T = tY

#### Document 6

1. 
    1. $Y = \frac{1}{1 - c} - cT + \overline{C} + \overline{I} + \overline{G}$. The Keynesian multiplier is $k = \frac{1}{1 - c}$
    2. $Y = \frac{1}{1 - 3/4} (1000 + 3000 + 4000 - 3000)$ = 20,000,
       $k = \frac{1}{1 - 3/4} = 4$
    3. $\Delta Y = k \times \Delta \overline{I} = 4 \times -300 = -1200$. The fiscal balance isn't changed.
2. 
    1. $Y = \frac{1}{1 - c (1 - t)} + \overline{C} + \overline{I} + \overline{G}$
    2. $k = \frac{1}{1/4 - (1/4 \times 1/5)} = 2,5$
    3. $\Delta Y = k \times \Delta \overline{I} = 4 \times -300 = -1200$. The fiscal balance is changed.

|                                                 | Y      | C      | I     | G     | T or tY | Fiscal Balance |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ------ | ------ | ----- | ----- | ------- | -------------- |
| ***Initial situation with fix taxes***          | 20,000 | 13,000 | 3,000 | 4,000 | 4,000   | 0              |
| ***New equilibrium with fix taxes***            | 18,800 | 12,100 | 2,700 | 4,000 | 4,000   | 0              |
| ***Initial situation with proportional taxes*** | 20,000 | 13,000 | 3,000 | 4,000 | 4,000   | 0              |
| ***New equilibrium with proportional taxes***   | 19,250 | 12,550 | 2,700 | 4,000 | 3,850   | -150           |

## How to regulate the economy

### Principles of the monetary policy

Sometimes, the economy is *really* in crisis. State **has** to do something: It's the Keynes Policies.

A monetary policy have 2 aims:
1. Have prices be stable and confident money inside the country — *Internal*
2. Have money stocks be stable (outside the country) — *External*

One of the solution is **money creation**. You can have 2 different money types, such as:
- Central Bank Moneys (Central Banks to Second Tier Banks)
- Current Money (banks to everyone else)

The way money creation work is trough scriptural money (in opposition as fiat money, physical money where the value granted by one asset is less than the production cost).

*L'Euro est la seule monnaie autorisé en France.*

Central bank accord money to sencond tier bank with a fixed interest rate *directeur*. Then, banks needs to fix their interest rate (*commercial*) to something at least equals to the ird, so it's not in deficit.
### The superiority of the fiscal policy
